mlir/docs/Tutorials/DefiningAttributesAndTypes.md, before:

# Defining Dialect Attributes and Types

This document is a quickstart to defining dialect specific extensions to the
[attribute](LangRef.md#attributes) and [type](LangRef.md#type-system) systems in
MLIR. The main part of this tutorial focuses on defining types, but the
instructions are nearly identical for defining attributes.

See [MLIR specification](LangRef.md) for more information about MLIR, the
structure of the IR, operations, etc.

## Types

Types in MLIR (like attributes, locations, and many other things) are
value-typed. This means that instances of `Type` are passed around by-value, as
opposed to by-pointer or by-reference. The `Type` class in itself acts as a
wrapper around an internal storage object that is uniqued within an instance of
an `MLIRContext`.

### Defining the type class

As described above, `Type` objects in MLIR are value-typed and rely on having an
implicit internal storage object that holds the actual data for the type. When
defining a new `Type` it isn't always necessary to define a new storage class.
So before defining the derived `Type`, it's important to know which of the two
classes of `Type` we are defining:

Some types are _singleton_ in nature, meaning they have no parameters and only
ever have one instance, like the [`index` type](LangRef.md#index-type).

Other types are _parametric_, and contain additional information that
differentiates different instances of the same `Type`. For example the
[`integer` type](LangRef.md#integer-type) contains a bitwidth, with `i8` and
`i16` representing different instances of
[`integer` type](LangRef.md#integer-type). _Parametric_ may also contain a
mutable component, which can be used, for example, to construct self-referring
recursive types. The mutable component _cannot_ be used to differentiate
instances of a type class, so usually such types contain other parametric
components that serve to identify them.

#### Singleton types

For singleton types, we can jump straight into defining the derived type class.
Given that only one instance of such types may exist, there is no need to
provide our own storage class.

```c++
/// This class defines a simple parameterless singleton type. All derived types
/// must inherit from the CRTP class 'Type::TypeBase'. It takes as template
/// parameters the concrete type (SimpleType), the base class to use (Type),
/// the internal storage class (the default TypeStorage here), and an optional
/// set of type traits and interfaces(detailed below).
class SimpleType : public Type::TypeBase<SimpleType, Type, TypeStorage> {
public:
  /// Inherit some necessary constructors from 'TypeBase'.
  using Base::Base;

  /// The `TypeBase` class provides the following utility methods for
  /// constructing instances of this type:
  /// static SimpleType get(MLIRContext *ctx);
};
```

#### Parametric types

Parametric types are those with additional construction or uniquing constraints,
that allow for representing multiple different instances of a single class. As
such, these types require defining a type storage class to contain the
parametric data.

##### Defining a type storage

Type storage objects contain all of the data necessary to construct and unique a
parametric type instance. The storage classes must obey the following:

*   Inherit from the base type storage class `TypeStorage`.
*   Define a type alias, `KeyTy`, that maps to a type that uniquely identifies
    an instance of the derived type.
*   Provide a construction method that is used to allocate a new instance of the
    storage class.
    -   `static Storage *construct(TypeStorageAllocator &, const KeyTy &key)`
*   Provide a comparison method between the storage and `KeyTy`.
    -   `bool operator==(const KeyTy &) const`
*   Provide a method to generate the `KeyTy` from a list of arguments passed to
    the uniquer. (Note: This is only necessary if the `KeyTy` cannot be default
    constructed from these arguments).
    -   `static KeyTy getKey(Args...&& args)`
*   Provide a method to hash an instance of the `KeyTy`. (Note: This is not
    necessary if an `llvm::DenseMapInfo<KeyTy>` specialization exists)
    -   `static llvm::hash_code hashKey(const KeyTy &)`

Let's look at an example:

```c++
/// Here we define a storage class for a ComplexType, that holds a non-zero
/// integer and an integer type.
struct ComplexTypeStorage : public TypeStorage {
  ComplexTypeStorage(unsigned nonZeroParam, Type integerType)
      : nonZeroParam(nonZeroParam), integerType(integerType) {}

  /// The hash key for this storage is a pair of the integer and type params.
  using KeyTy = std::pair<unsigned, Type>;

  /// Define the comparison function for the key type.
  bool operator==(const KeyTy &key) const {
    return key == KeyTy(nonZeroParam, integerType);
  }

  /// Define a hash function for the key type.
  /// Note: This isn't necessary because std::pair, unsigned, and Type all have
  /// hash functions already available.
  static llvm::hash_code hashKey(const KeyTy &key) {
    return llvm::hash_combine(key.first, key.second);
  }

  /// Define a construction function for the key type.
  /// Note: This isn't necessary because KeyTy can be directly constructed with
  /// the given parameters.
  static KeyTy getKey(unsigned nonZeroParam, Type integerType) {
    return KeyTy(nonZeroParam, integerType);
  }

  /// Define a construction method for creating a new instance of this storage.
  static ComplexTypeStorage *construct(TypeStorageAllocator &allocator,
                                       const KeyTy &key) {
    return new (allocator.allocate<ComplexTypeStorage>())
        ComplexTypeStorage(key.first, key.second);
  }

  /// The parametric data held by the storage class.
  unsigned nonZeroParam;
  Type integerType;
};
```

##### Type class definition

Now that the storage class has been created, the derived type class can be
defined. This structure is similar to [singleton types](#singleton-types),
except that a bit more of the functionality provided by `Type::TypeBase` is put
to use.

```c++
/// This class defines a parametric type. All derived types must inherit from
/// the CRTP class 'Type::TypeBase'. It takes as template parameters the
/// concrete type (ComplexType), the base class to use (Type), the storage
/// class (ComplexTypeStorage), and an optional set of traits and
/// interfaces(detailed below).
class ComplexType : public Type::TypeBase<ComplexType, Type,
                                          ComplexTypeStorage> {
public:
  /// Inherit some necessary constructors from 'TypeBase'.
  using Base::Base;

  /// This method is used to get an instance of the 'ComplexType'. This method
  /// asserts that all of the construction invariants were satisfied. To
  /// gracefully handle failed construction, getChecked should be used instead.
  static ComplexType get(unsigned param, Type type) {
    // Call into a helper 'get' method in 'TypeBase' to get a uniqued instance
    // of this type. All parameters to the storage class are passed after the
    // context.
    return Base::get(type.getContext(), param, type);
  }

  /// This method is used to get an instance of the 'ComplexType'. If any of the
  /// construction invariants are invalid, errors are emitted with the provided
  /// `emitError` function and a null type is returned.
  /// Note: This method is completely optional.
  static ComplexType getChecked(function_ref<InFlightDiagnostic()> emitError,
                                unsigned param, Type type) {
    // Call into a helper 'getChecked' method in 'TypeBase' to get a uniqued
    // instance of this type. All parameters to the storage class are passed
    // after the context.
    return Base::getChecked(emitError, type.getContext(), param, type);
  }

  /// This method is used to verify the construction invariants passed into the
  /// 'get' and 'getChecked' methods. Note: This method is completely optional.
  static LogicalResult verify(function_ref<InFlightDiagnostic()> emitError,
                              unsigned param, Type type) {
    // Our type only allows non-zero parameters.
    if (param == 0)
      return emitError() << "non-zero parameter passed to 'ComplexType'";
    // Our type also expects an integer type.
    if (!type.isa<IntegerType>())
      return emitError() << "non integer-type passed to 'ComplexType'";
    return success();
  }

  /// Return the parameter value.
  unsigned getParameter() {
    // 'getImpl' returns a pointer to our internal storage instance.
    return getImpl()->nonZeroParam;
  }

  /// Return the integer parameter type.
  IntegerType getParameterType() {
    // 'getImpl' returns a pointer to our internal storage instance.
    return getImpl()->integerType;
  }
};
```

#### Mutable types

Types with a mutable component are special instances of parametric types that
allow for mutating certain parameters after construction.

##### Defining a type storage

In addition to the requirements for the type storage class for parametric types,
the storage class for types with a mutable component must additionally obey the
following.

*   The mutable component must not participate in the storage `KeyTy`.
*   Provide a mutation method that is used to modify an existing instance of the
    storage. This method modifies the mutable component based on arguments,
    using `allocator` for any newly dynamically-allocated storage, and indicates
    whether the modification was successful.
    -   `LogicalResult mutate(StorageAllocator &allocator, Args ...&& args)`

Let's define a simple storage for recursive types, where a type is identified by
its name and may contain another type including itself.

```c++
/// Here we define a storage class for a RecursiveType that is identified by its
/// name and contains another type.
struct RecursiveTypeStorage : public TypeStorage {
  /// The type is uniquely identified by its name. Note that the contained type
  /// is _not_ a part of the key.
  using KeyTy = StringRef;

  /// Construct the storage from the type name. Explicitly initialize the
  /// containedType to nullptr, which is used as marker for the mutable
  /// component being not yet initialized.
  RecursiveTypeStorage(StringRef name) : name(name), containedType(nullptr) {}

  /// Define the comparison function.
  bool operator==(const KeyTy &key) const { return key == name; }

  /// Define a construction method for creating a new instance of the storage.
  static RecursiveTypeStorage *construct(StorageAllocator &allocator,
                                         const KeyTy &key) {
    // Note that the key string is copied into the allocator to ensure it
    // remains live as long as the storage itself.
    return new (allocator.allocate<RecursiveTypeStorage>())
        RecursiveTypeStorage(allocator.copyInto(key));
  }

  /// Define a mutation method for changing the type after it is created. In
  /// many cases, we only want to set the mutable component once and reject
  /// any further modification, which can be achieved by returning failure from
  /// this function.
  LogicalResult mutate(StorageAllocator &, Type body) {
    // If the contained type has been initialized already, and the call tries
    // to change it, reject the change.
    if (containedType && containedType != body)
      return failure();

    // Change the body successfully.
    containedType = body;
    return success();
  }

  StringRef name;
  Type containedType;
};
```

##### Type class definition

Having defined the storage class, we can define the type class itself.
`Type::TypeBase` provides a `mutate` method that forwards its arguments to the
`mutate` method of the storage and ensures the mutation happens safely.

```c++
class RecursiveType : public Type::TypeBase<RecursiveType, Type,
                                            RecursiveTypeStorage> {
public:
  /// Inherit parent constructors.
  using Base::Base;

  /// Creates an instance of the Recursive type. This only takes the type name
  /// and returns the type with uninitialized body.
  static RecursiveType get(MLIRContext *ctx, StringRef name) {
    // Call into the base to get a uniqued instance of this type. The parameter
    // (name) is passed after the context.
    return Base::get(ctx, name);
  }

  /// Now we can change the mutable component of the type. This is an instance
  /// method callable on an already existing RecursiveType.
  void setBody(Type body) {
    // Call into the base to mutate the type.
    LogicalResult result = Base::mutate(body);

    // Most types expect the mutation to always succeed, but types can implement
    // custom logic for handling mutation failures.
    assert(succeeded(result) &&
           "attempting to change the body of an already-initialized type");

    // Avoid unused-variable warning when building without assertions.
    (void) result;
  }

  /// Returns the contained type, which may be null if it has not been
  /// initialized yet.
  Type getBody() {
    return getImpl()->containedType;
  }

  /// Returns the name.
  StringRef getName() {
    return getImpl()->name;
  }
};
```

### Registering types with a Dialect

Once the dialect types have been defined, they must then be registered with a
`Dialect`. This is done via a similar mechanism to
[operations](LangRef.md#operations), with the `addTypes` method.

```c++
struct MyDialect : public Dialect {
  MyDialect(MLIRContext *context) : Dialect(/*name=*/"mydialect", context) {
    /// Add these defined types to the dialect.
    addTypes<SimpleType, ComplexType, RecursiveType>();
  }
};
```

### Parsing and Printing

As a final step after registration, a dialect must override the `printType` and
`parseType` hooks. These enable native support for round-tripping the type in
the textual `.mlir`.

```c++
class MyDialect : public Dialect {
public:
  /// Parse an instance of a type registered to the dialect.
  Type parseType(DialectAsmParser &parser) const override;

  /// Print an instance of a type registered to the dialect.
  void printType(Type type, DialectAsmPrinter &printer) const override;
};
```

These methods take an instance of a high-level parser or printer that allows for
easily implementing the necessary functionality. As described in the
[MLIR language reference](../../LangRef.md#dialect-types), dialect types are
generally represented as: `! dialect-namespace < type-data >`, with a pretty
form available under certain circumstances. The responsibility of our parser and
printer is to provide the `type-data` bits.

### Traits

Similarly to operations, `Type` classes may attach `Traits` that provide
additional mixin methods and other data. `Trait` classes may be specified via
the trailing template argument of the `Type::TypeBase` class. See the main
[`Trait`](../Traits.md) documentation for more information on defining and using
traits.

### Interfaces

Similarly to operations, `Type` classes may attach `Interfaces` to provide an
abstract interface into the type. See the main [`Interface`](../Interfaces.md)
documentation for more information on defining and using interfaces.

## Attributes

As stated in the introduction, the process for defining dialect attributes is
nearly identical to that of defining dialect types. That key difference is that
the things named `*Type` are generally now named `*Attr`.

*   `Type::TypeBase` -> `Attribute::AttrBase`
*   `TypeStorageAllocator` -> `AttributeStorageAllocator`
*   `addTypes` -> `addAttributes`

Aside from that, all of the interfaces for uniquing and storage construction are
all the same.

Commit message:

[mlir][StorageUniquer] Properly call the destructor on non-trivially destructible storage instances
This allows for storage instances to store data that isn't uniqued in the context, or contain otherwise non-trivial logic, in the rare situations that they occur. Storage instances with trivial destructors will still have their destructor skipped. A consequence of this is that the storage instance definition must be visible from the place that registers the type.

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D98311

mlir/docs/Tutorials/DefiningAttributesAndTypes.md, after:

# Defining Dialect Attributes and Types

This document is a quickstart to defining dialect specific extensions to the
[attribute](LangRef.md#attributes) and [type](LangRef.md#type-system) systems in
MLIR. The main part of this tutorial focuses on defining types, but the
instructions are nearly identical for defining attributes.

See [MLIR specification](LangRef.md) for more information about MLIR, the
structure of the IR, operations, etc.

## Types

Types in MLIR (like attributes, locations, and many other things) are
value-typed. This means that instances of `Type` are passed around by-value, as
opposed to by-pointer or by-reference. The `Type` class in itself acts as a
wrapper around an internal storage object that is uniqued within an instance of
an `MLIRContext`.

### Defining the type class

As described above, `Type` objects in MLIR are value-typed and rely on having an
implicit internal storage object that holds the actual data for the type. When
defining a new `Type` it isn't always necessary to define a new storage class.
So before defining the derived `Type`, it's important to know which of the two
classes of `Type` we are defining:

Some types are _singleton_ in nature, meaning they have no parameters and only
ever have one instance, like the [`index` type](LangRef.md#index-type).

Other types are _parametric_, and contain additional information that
differentiates different instances of the same `Type`. For example the
[`integer` type](LangRef.md#integer-type) contains a bitwidth, with `i8` and
`i16` representing different instances of
[`integer` type](LangRef.md#integer-type). _Parametric_ may also contain a
mutable component, which can be used, for example, to construct self-referring
recursive types. The mutable component _cannot_ be used to differentiate
instances of a type class, so usually such types contain other parametric
components that serve to identify them.

#### Singleton types

For singleton types, we can jump straight into defining the derived type class.
Given that only one instance of such types may exist, there is no need to
provide our own storage class.

```c++
/// This class defines a simple parameterless singleton type. All derived types
/// must inherit from the CRTP class 'Type::TypeBase'. It takes as template
/// parameters the concrete type (SimpleType), the base class to use (Type),
/// the internal storage class (the default TypeStorage here), and an optional
/// set of type traits and interfaces(detailed below).
class SimpleType : public Type::TypeBase<SimpleType, Type, TypeStorage> {
public:
  /// Inherit some necessary constructors from 'TypeBase'.
  using Base::Base;

  /// The `TypeBase` class provides the following utility methods for
  /// constructing instances of this type:
  /// static SimpleType get(MLIRContext *ctx);
};
```

#### Parametric types

Parametric types are those with additional construction or uniquing constraints,
that allow for representing multiple different instances of a single class. As
such, these types require defining a type storage class to contain the
parametric data.

##### Defining a type storage

Type storage objects contain all of the data necessary to construct and unique a
parametric type instance. The storage classes must obey the following:

*   Inherit from the base type storage class `TypeStorage`.
*   Define a type alias, `KeyTy`, that maps to a type that uniquely identifies
    an instance of the derived type.
*   Provide a construction method that is used to allocate a new instance of the
    storage class.
    -   `static Storage *construct(TypeStorageAllocator &, const KeyTy &key)`
*   Provide a comparison method between the storage and `KeyTy`.
    -   `bool operator==(const KeyTy &) const`
*   Provide a method to generate the `KeyTy` from a list of arguments passed to
    the uniquer. (Note: This is only necessary if the `KeyTy` cannot be default
    constructed from these arguments).
    -   `static KeyTy getKey(Args...&& args)`
*   Provide a method to hash an instance of the `KeyTy`. (Note: This is not
    necessary if an `llvm::DenseMapInfo<KeyTy>` specialization exists)
    -   `static llvm::hash_code hashKey(const KeyTy &)`

Let's look at an example:

```c++
/// Here we define a storage class for a ComplexType, that holds a non-zero
/// integer and an integer type.
struct ComplexTypeStorage : public TypeStorage {
  ComplexTypeStorage(unsigned nonZeroParam, Type integerType)
      : nonZeroParam(nonZeroParam), integerType(integerType) {}

  /// The hash key for this storage is a pair of the integer and type params.
  using KeyTy = std::pair<unsigned, Type>;

  /// Define the comparison function for the key type.
  bool operator==(const KeyTy &key) const {
    return key == KeyTy(nonZeroParam, integerType);
  }

  /// Define a hash function for the key type.
  /// Note: This isn't necessary because std::pair, unsigned, and Type all have
  /// hash functions already available.
  static llvm::hash_code hashKey(const KeyTy &key) {
    return llvm::hash_combine(key.first, key.second);
  }

  /// Define a construction function for the key type.
  /// Note: This isn't necessary because KeyTy can be directly constructed with
  /// the given parameters.
  static KeyTy getKey(unsigned nonZeroParam, Type integerType) {
    return KeyTy(nonZeroParam, integerType);
  }

  /// Define a construction method for creating a new instance of this storage.
  static ComplexTypeStorage *construct(TypeStorageAllocator &allocator,
                                       const KeyTy &key) {
    return new (allocator.allocate<ComplexTypeStorage>())
        ComplexTypeStorage(key.first, key.second);
  }

  /// The parametric data held by the storage class.
  unsigned nonZeroParam;
  Type integerType;
};
```

##### Type class definition

Now that the storage class has been created, the derived type class can be
defined. This structure is similar to [singleton types](#singleton-types),
except that a bit more of the functionality provided by `Type::TypeBase` is put
to use.

```c++
/// This class defines a parametric type. All derived types must inherit from
/// the CRTP class 'Type::TypeBase'. It takes as template parameters the
/// concrete type (ComplexType), the base class to use (Type), the storage
/// class (ComplexTypeStorage), and an optional set of traits and
/// interfaces(detailed below).
class ComplexType : public Type::TypeBase<ComplexType, Type,
                                          ComplexTypeStorage> {
public:
  /// Inherit some necessary constructors from 'TypeBase'.
  using Base::Base;

  /// This method is used to get an instance of the 'ComplexType'. This method
  /// asserts that all of the construction invariants were satisfied. To
  /// gracefully handle failed construction, getChecked should be used instead.
  static ComplexType get(unsigned param, Type type) {
    // Call into a helper 'get' method in 'TypeBase' to get a uniqued instance
    // of this type. All parameters to the storage class are passed after the
    // context.
    return Base::get(type.getContext(), param, type);
  }

  /// This method is used to get an instance of the 'ComplexType'. If any of the
  /// construction invariants are invalid, errors are emitted with the provided
  /// `emitError` function and a null type is returned.
  /// Note: This method is completely optional.
  static ComplexType getChecked(function_ref<InFlightDiagnostic()> emitError,
                                unsigned param, Type type) {
    // Call into a helper 'getChecked' method in 'TypeBase' to get a uniqued
    // instance of this type. All parameters to the storage class are passed
    // after the context.
    return Base::getChecked(emitError, type.getContext(), param, type);
  }

  /// This method is used to verify the construction invariants passed into the
  /// 'get' and 'getChecked' methods. Note: This method is completely optional.
  static LogicalResult verify(function_ref<InFlightDiagnostic()> emitError,
                              unsigned param, Type type) {
    // Our type only allows non-zero parameters.
    if (param == 0)
      return emitError() << "non-zero parameter passed to 'ComplexType'";
    // Our type also expects an integer type.
    if (!type.isa<IntegerType>())
      return emitError() << "non integer-type passed to 'ComplexType'";
    return success();
  }

  /// Return the parameter value.
  unsigned getParameter() {
    // 'getImpl' returns a pointer to our internal storage instance.
    return getImpl()->nonZeroParam;
  }

  /// Return the integer parameter type.
  IntegerType getParameterType() {
    // 'getImpl' returns a pointer to our internal storage instance.
    return getImpl()->integerType;
  }
};
```

#### Mutable types

Types with a mutable component are special instances of parametric types that
allow for mutating certain parameters after construction.

##### Defining a type storage

In addition to the requirements for the type storage class for parametric types,
the storage class for types with a mutable component must additionally obey the
following.

*   The mutable component must not participate in the storage `KeyTy`.
*   Provide a mutation method that is used to modify an existing instance of the
    storage. This method modifies the mutable component based on arguments,
    using `allocator` for any newly dynamically-allocated storage, and indicates
    whether the modification was successful.
    -   `LogicalResult mutate(StorageAllocator &allocator, Args ...&& args)`

Let's define a simple storage for recursive types, where a type is identified by
its name and may contain another type including itself.

```c++
/// Here we define a storage class for a RecursiveType that is identified by its
/// name and contains another type.
struct RecursiveTypeStorage : public TypeStorage {
  /// The type is uniquely identified by its name. Note that the contained type
  /// is _not_ a part of the key.
  using KeyTy = StringRef;

  /// Construct the storage from the type name. Explicitly initialize the
  /// containedType to nullptr, which is used as marker for the mutable
  /// component being not yet initialized.
  RecursiveTypeStorage(StringRef name) : name(name), containedType(nullptr) {}

  /// Define the comparison function.
  bool operator==(const KeyTy &key) const { return key == name; }

  /// Define a construction method for creating a new instance of the storage.
  static RecursiveTypeStorage *construct(StorageAllocator &allocator,
                                         const KeyTy &key) {
    // Note that the key string is copied into the allocator to ensure it
    // remains live as long as the storage itself.
    return new (allocator.allocate<RecursiveTypeStorage>())
        RecursiveTypeStorage(allocator.copyInto(key));
  }

  /// Define a mutation method for changing the type after it is created. In
  /// many cases, we only want to set the mutable component once and reject
  /// any further modification, which can be achieved by returning failure from
  /// this function.
  LogicalResult mutate(StorageAllocator &, Type body) {
    // If the contained type has been initialized already, and the call tries
    // to change it, reject the change.
    if (containedType && containedType != body)
      return failure();

    // Change the body successfully.
    containedType = body;
    return success();
  }

  StringRef name;
  Type containedType;
};
```

##### Type class definition

Having defined the storage class, we can define the type class itself.
`Type::TypeBase` provides a `mutate` method that forwards its arguments to the
`mutate` method of the storage and ensures the mutation happens safely.

```c++
class RecursiveType : public Type::TypeBase<RecursiveType, Type,
                                            RecursiveTypeStorage> {
public:
  /// Inherit parent constructors.
  using Base::Base;

  /// Creates an instance of the Recursive type. This only takes the type name
  /// and returns the type with uninitialized body.
  static RecursiveType get(MLIRContext *ctx, StringRef name) {
    // Call into the base to get a uniqued instance of this type. The parameter
    // (name) is passed after the context.
    return Base::get(ctx, name);
  }

  /// Now we can change the mutable component of the type. This is an instance
  /// method callable on an already existing RecursiveType.
  void setBody(Type body) {
    // Call into the base to mutate the type.
    LogicalResult result = Base::mutate(body);

    // Most types expect the mutation to always succeed, but types can implement
    // custom logic for handling mutation failures.
    assert(succeeded(result) &&
           "attempting to change the body of an already-initialized type");

    // Avoid unused-variable warning when building without assertions.
    (void) result;
  }

  /// Returns the contained type, which may be null if it has not been
  /// initialized yet.
  Type getBody() {
    return getImpl()->containedType;
  }

  /// Returns the name.
  StringRef getName() {
    return getImpl()->name;
  }
};
```

### Registering types with a Dialect

Once the dialect types have been defined, they must then be registered with a
`Dialect`. This is done via a similar mechanism to
[operations](LangRef.md#operations), with the `addTypes` method. The one
distinct difference with operations, is that when a type is registered the
definition of its storage class must be visible.

```c++
struct MyDialect : public Dialect {
  MyDialect(MLIRContext *context) : Dialect(/*name=*/"mydialect", context) {
    /// Add these defined types to the dialect.
    addTypes<SimpleType, ComplexType, RecursiveType>();
  }
};
```

### Parsing and Printing

As a final step after registration, a dialect must override the `printType` and
`parseType` hooks. These enable native support for round-tripping the type in
the textual `.mlir`.

```c++
class MyDialect : public Dialect {
public:
  /// Parse an instance of a type registered to the dialect.
  Type parseType(DialectAsmParser &parser) const override;

  /// Print an instance of a type registered to the dialect.
  void printType(Type type, DialectAsmPrinter &printer) const override;
};
```

These methods take an instance of a high-level parser or printer that allows for
easily implementing the necessary functionality. As described in the
[MLIR language reference](../../LangRef.md#dialect-types), dialect types are
generally represented as: `! dialect-namespace < type-data >`, with a pretty
form available under certain circumstances. The responsibility of our parser and
printer is to provide the `type-data` bits.

### Traits

Similarly to operations, `Type` classes may attach `Traits` that provide
additional mixin methods and other data. `Trait` classes may be specified via
the trailing template argument of the `Type::TypeBase` class. See the main
[`Trait`](../Traits.md) documentation for more information on defining and using
traits.

### Interfaces

Similarly to operations, `Type` classes may attach `Interfaces` to provide an
abstract interface into the type. See the main [`Interface`](../Interfaces.md)
documentation for more information on defining and using interfaces.

## Attributes

As stated in the introduction, the process for defining dialect attributes is
nearly identical to that of defining dialect types. That key difference is that
the things named `*Type` are generally now named `*Attr`.

*   `Type::TypeBase` -> `Attribute::AttrBase`
*   `TypeStorageAllocator` -> `AttributeStorageAllocator`
*   `addTypes` -> `addAttributes`

Aside from that, all of the interfaces for uniquing and storage construction are
all the same.
